cover action in Chile 1963 to 1973 staff
report of the Select Committee to study
governmental operations with respect to
intelligence activities United States
Senate US Government Printing Office
Washington 1975 Senate Select Committee
to study governmental operations with
respect to intelligence activities Frank
Church Idaho chairman John G tower Texas
vice chairman Philip a heart Michigan
Howard H Baker junior Tennessee Walter F
Mondale Minnesota Barry Goldwater
Arizona
Walter D Huddleston Kentucky Charles
Macbeth IIST jr. Maryland Robert Morgan
North Carolina Richard Schweiker
Pennsylvania Gary Hart Colorado William
G Miller staff director Frederick AO
Schwarz jr. chief counsel Curtis our
smothers counsel to the minority our
jury Hawtrey clerk of the committee
preface the statements of facts
contained this report are true to the
best of the committee's staff ability to
determine them the report and any
judgment expressed in it are tentative
several areas are merely touched on
investigation in this areas is
continuing the purpose of the report is
to laid out the basic facts of covert
action in Chile to enable the committee
to hold public hearings this report is
based on an extensive review of document
of the Central Intelligence Agency the
Department of State and Defense and the
National Security Council and on
testimony by officials and former
officials with few exceptions names of
Chileans and of Chilean institution has
been omitted in order to avoid revealing
intelligence sources and methods and to
limit needless harm to individual
Chileans who cooperated with the Central
Intelligence
agency they report us however convey an
accurate picture of the scope purposes
and magnitude of United States covered
action in Chile covered action in Chile
1963 to 1973 overview and background a
overview covered action in Chile covered
United States involvement in Chile in
the decade between 1963 and 1973 was
extensive and continues the Central
Intelligence Agency spent three million
dollars in an effort to influence the
outcome of the 1964 Chilean presidential
elections eight million dollars was
spent currently in the three years
between 1970 and the military coupe in
September 1973 with over three million
dollars expended in fiscal year 1972
alone footnote number one moreover the
bear figures are more likely to
understate than to exaggerate the extent
of us covered action in the years before
the 1973 coupe especially CA dollars
could be channeled to the Chilean block
market where the unofficial exchange
rate into Chilean schools often reached
five times the official rate and
footnote it is not easy to draw a neat
box around what was covered action the
range of clandestine activities
undertaken by the CIA includes covered
action clandestine intelligence
collection liason with local police and
intelligence services and
counterintelligence the distinctions
among the types of activities are
mirrored in organizational arrangement
both at headquarters and in the field
yet it is not always so easy to
distinguish the effects of various
activities if the CIA provides financial
support to a political party this is
called covered action if the agency
develops a paid asset in that party for
the purpose of information gathering the
project is clandestine intelligence
collection the goal of covered action is
political impact at the same time
secret relationships developed for the
clandestine collection of intelligence
may also have political effects even
though no attempt is made by American
officials to manipulate the relationship
for short-run political gain for example
in Chile between 1970 and 1973 CIA and
American military attache contact with
the Chilean military for the purpose of
gathering intelligence enabled the
United States to sustain communication
with a group most likely to take power
from President Salvador Allende
what did covered CIA money buy in Chile
it financed activities covering a broad
spectrum from cipa propaganda
manipulation of the press to large-scale
support for Chilean political parties
from the public opinion polls to direct
attempt to foment a military coup the
scope of normal activities of the CIA
station isn't Iago included placement of
station dictating material in the
Chilean media through propaganda assets
direct support of publications and
efforts to oppose communist and
left-wing influence in student peasant
and lever organizations in addition to
these routine activities the CIA station
isn't Iago was several times called upon
to undertake large specific projects
when senior officials in Washington
perceived special dangers or
opportunities in Chile special CIA
projects were developed
often a support of a larger package of
u.s. actions for instance the CIA spent
over three million dollars in an
election program in 1964 half a decade
later in 1970 the CIA engaged in another
special effort this time at the Express
request of President Nixon and under the
unjust not to inform the Department of
State or defense or the ambassador of
the project nor was the forty Committee
footnote number two the forty Committee
is a sub-cabinet level body of the
executive branch whose mandate is to
review proposed major covered actions
the committee has existed in similar
form since the 1950s under a variety of
names 5412 panel special group until
1964 303 committee - 1969 and 40
committee since nineteen C since 1969
currently chaired by president's
assistant for national security affairs
the committee includes the
Undersecretary of State for political
affairs the Deputy Secretary of Defense
the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff and the Director of Central
Intelligence and footnote ever informed
the CIA attempt directly to ferment a
military coup in Chile it passed three
weapons to a group of killing officers
who plotted a coop beginning with the
kidnapping of chilling armored
commander-in-chief Rena Schneider
however these guns were turned the group
which stage the abortive kidnap of
Schneider which resulted in his death
apparently was not the same as the group
which received CIA weapons footnote
number three this matter is discussed
extensively in the committee's interim
report entitled alledge of SAS ination
plots involving foreign leaders 94
Congress first session November 1975
page 225 to 250 for and footnote when
the coop attempt failed an agenda was
inaugurated President the CIA was
authorized by the 40 committee to fund
groups in opposition to attend it in
Chile the effort was massive 8 million
dollars was spent in the three years
between 1970 election and the military
coupe in September 1973 money was
furnished to media organizations -
opposition political parties and in
limited amount to private sector
organizations numerous allegations have
been made about us covered activities in
Chile during 1972 1973 several these are
false others all have true in most
instances the response to the allegation
must be qualified was the United States
directly involved covered Lee in the
1973 coop in Chile the committee has
found no evidence that it was however
the United States sought in 1970 to
ferment a military coup in Chile after
1970 it adopted a policy both offered
and covered of opposition to agenda and
it remain in intelligence contact with
the Chilean military including officers
who are participating in coup plotting
did the u.s. provide cover support to
strike in truck owners or other strikers
during 1971 to 73 the 40 committee did
not approve any such support however the
u.s. passed money to private sector
groups which supported these strikers
and in at least one case a small amount
of CIA money was passed to the strikers
by a private sector organization country
two CIA ground rules did the US provide
cover support to right-wing terrorist
organization during 1972-73 the CIA gave
support in 1970 to one group whose
tactics became more violent over time
through 1971 that group received small
sums of American money through third
parties for specific purposes and it is
possible that money was passed to these
groups on the extreme right from CIA
supported opposition political parties
the pattern of the United States covered
action in Chile is striking but not
unique it arose in the context not only
of American foreign policy but also of
covered US involvement in other
countries within and outside Latin
America the scale of CIA involvement in
Chile was unusual but by no means
unprecedented be issues the Chilean case
raises most of the issues connected with
covered action as an instrument of
American foreign policy
it consisted of long frequently heavy
involvement in Chilean politics it
involved the gamut of covered
action methods say only covered military
operations and it revealed a variety of
different authorization procedures with
different amplifications for oversight
and control as one case of us covered
action the judgment of past actions are
framed not for their own sake rather
they are intended to serve as basis for
formulating recommendations for the
future the basic questions are easily
stated first why did the United States
mount such an extensive covered action
program in Chile why was that program
continued and then expanded in the
earliest 1970s
second how was this major covered action
program authorized and directed what
roles were played by the president the
forchick committee the CIA the
ambassador's and the Congress third the
the US policymakers take into account
the judgments of the intelligence
analysis on Chile when they formulated
and approved us covered operations does
the Chilean experience illustrate an
inherent conflict between the role of
the director of Central Intelligence as
a producer of intelligence and his role
as manager of cover operations and
fourth did the perceived threat in Chile
justified the level of US response what
was the effect of such large
concentrated programs of cover political
action in Chile what were the effects
both abroad and at home of the
relationships which developed between
the intelligence agencies and American
based multinational corporations see
storico background to recent United
States Chilean relations one Chilean
politics and society and overview Chile
has historically attracted far more
interest in Latin America and more
recently throughout the world
then it's remote geographic position and
scale and 11 million population
WordPress suggests Chile's history has
been one of remarkable continuity in
civilian democratic rule from
independence in 1818 until the military
coup d'etat
of September 1973 Chile underwent only
three brief interruptions of his
democratic tradition from 1932 until the
of earth Ramadan day in 1973
constitutional rule in Chile wasn't
broken Chile defies simplistic North
American stereotypes of Latin America
with more than two-thirds of his
population living in cities in a 1970
per capita GNP of seven hundred and
sixty dollars Chile is one of the most
urbanized and industrialized countries
in Latin America nearly all of the
Chilean population is literate Chile has
an advanced social welfare program
although his activities did not reach
the majority of the poor until popular
participation began to be exerted in the
earliest 1960s Chileans are largely
integrated mixture of indigenous
American with European immigrants talk
until September 1973 Chileans broked
their demands in a big camera Parliament
through a multi-party system and through
a broader array of economic trade union
and more recently managerial and
professional associations second US
policy towards Chile the history of
United States policy toward Chile
followed the pattern of the United
States diplomatic and economic interest
in the hemisphere in the same year that
the United States recognized Chilean
independence 1823 it also proclaimed the
Monroe Doctrine this unilateral policy
pronouncement of the United States was
directed as a warning to arrival
European powers not to interfere in the
internal political affairs of this
hemisphere the u.s. reaction to piddle
Castro's rise to power suggested that a
while the Monroe Doctrine had been
abandoned the principles which prompted
it were still alive Castro's presence
spurred a new United States hemispheric
policy with special significance for
Chile the Alliance for Progress there
was little disagreement among
policymakers either at the end of the
Eisenhower administration
the beginning of the Kennedy
administration that something had to be
done about the alarming threat that
Castro was seen to represent to the
stability of the hemisphere the u.s.
reaction to the new hemispheric danger
communist revolution evolved into a dual
policy response widespread malnutrition
illiteracy hopeless housing condition
and hunger for the vast majority of
Latin Americans who were poor these were
seen as communism allies consequently
the u.s. undertook loans to national
development programs and support and
civilian reformist regimes all with an
eye to preventing the appearance of
another Fidel Castro in our hemisphere
but there was another component in US
policy to Latin America
counterinsurgency techniques were
developed to combat urban or rural or
guerrilla insurgencies after encouraged
or supported by Castro's regime
development could not cure overnight the
social ills which were seen as the
breeding ground of communism new loans
for Latin American countries internal
National Development programs would take
time to bear fruit in the meantime the
communist threat would continue the
vicious circle plaguing the logic of the
alliance for progress soon became
apparent in order to eliminate the
short-term danger of communist
subversion it was often seen as
necessary to support Latin American
armed forces yet frequently it was those
same armed forces who were helping to
freeze the status quo which the Alliance
sought to alter of all the countries in
the hemisphere Chile was chosen to
become the showcase for the new alliance
for progress Chile had the extensive
bureaucratic infrastructure to plan and
administer and national development
program moreover its history of popular
support for socialism communism and
other leftist parties was perceived in
Washington as flirtation with communism
in the years between 1962 and 1969 Chile
received well over a billion dollars in
direct overed United States
eight loans and grant both included
chili received more eighth per capita
than any country in the hemisphere
between 1964 and 1970 200 to 300 million
in short term lines of credit was
continuously available to chili from
private American banks third Chilean
political parties 1958 to 1970 the 1970
elections marked the fourth time
Salvador Allende had been the
presidential candidate of the Chilean
left his personality and his program was
familiar to Chilean voters his platform
was similar in all three elections
efforts to redistribute income and
reshape the Chilean economy beginning
with the nationalization of major
industries especially the copper
companies greatly expanded agrarian
reform and expanded relations with
socialist and communist countries again
Lee was one of the four candidates in
the 1958 elections his principal
opponents were Jorge Alessandra a
conservative and Eduardo Frei the
candidate of the newly formed Christian
Democratic Party which contended against
a traditional eccentric vertical party a
yentas coalition was an uneasy alliance
composed principally of the socialist
and communist parties leveled as a
popular action front or frapp again de
himself/herself devout Marxist was
considered a moderate within his
Socialist Party which ranged from the
extreme left to moderate Social
Democrats the Socialists however were
more militant than the prova Soviet
bureaucratic though highly organized and
disciplined come in his party agenda
finished second to Alessandra in 1958
election by less than 3% of the vote
neither candidate received a majority
and the Chilean Congress voted
Alessandra into office if again they
have received a vote which went to elect
his priests who received 3.3 percent of
the votes he would have won the election
the
under government lost popularity during
his Turner dissatisfaction with it was
registered in the 1961 congressional in
1963 municipal elections the frat
parties made significant gains and the
Christian Democratic Party steadily
increased its share of the electoral
until in the 1963 elections it became
the largest single party the 1964
election shaped up as a three-way race
fray was once again the Christian
Democratic candidate and the parties of
the left once again selected again they
as their standard better the governing
coalition the Democratic front choose
radical who need run as their candidate
due in part to an adverse election
result in a march 1964 by-election in a
previously conservative province the
Democratic Front collapsed the
conservatives and liberals reacting to
the prospect of an agendas victory
through their support to fray live in
Tehran as the standard bearer of only
the radical party after phrase decisive
majority victory in which he received
57% of the vote he began to implement
what he called a revolution in Liberty
that included agrarian tax and housing
reform to deal with the American copper
companies for a proposed Chilean ization
by which the state would purchase
majority ownership in order to exercise
control and stimulate output phrase
reforms while impressive fell far short
of what he had promised lacking a
majority in Congress he was caught
between the frat parties which demanded
extreme measures and the rightest with
health support from Frei in order to
force a compromise on the agrarian
reform issue like its predecessor the
Frank government lost popularity during
Easterner the Christian Democrats
portion of the boat in congressional
elections fell from 43 percent in 1965
to 31 percent in 1969 during the fray
years the internal strains of the
became more evident culminating in the
1968 defection of the party's left-wing
elements
frayed relations with the United States
were cordial although he pursued an
independent foreign policy his
government established diplomatic
relations with the Soviet Union
immediately after taking power and in
1969 reestablished
trade relations with Cuba